This should be very familiar to us by now:
a coordinate frame labeled A and a single
point. We can describe the point by a vector
with respect to frame A. The leading A in
front of the P indicates that. I can write
this vector in terms of its components - its
distances along the XA axis and the YA axis
and the unit vectors XA and YA hat. Now, let’s
introduce a new coordinate frame, frame B,
and it has got the same origin that’s rotated
by the angle Theta. I can describe the point
by a vector with respect to coordinate frame
B and I can write that in terms of the unit
vectors XB and YB hat and they’re indicated
here in red. I can write expressions for XB
hat in terms of cos Theta and sine Theta,
and I can write an expression for YB hat in
terms of minus sine Theta and cos Theta. If
I substitute these two equations into here,
I can write this expression. Then I can expand,
rearrange and factor out XA hat and YA hat.
The next thing to observe is because these
two coordinate frames share an origin, then
the vector AP and BP are in fact exactly the
same. The coefficients of XA hat must be the
same, so we can write this. And, the coefficients
of YA hat must be the same, so we can write
this. Let’s take those two expressions.
Simplify things a little bit and we can now
write this in matrix form. If you’re a little
unsure about this step, then just multiply
it out and you’ll find that you get the
expressions above. Now, we write the vector
part more concisely. Instead of in terms of
its individual elements, we write it as the
symbol P with respect to a particular coordinate
frame. So, this expression relates the vector
with respect to frame B to the vector with
respect to frame A. It is achieved by multiplying
the components of vector B by this 2 x 2
matrix.
We can make the expression even more concise
and write it like this. And, we introduce
the symbol R to represent a rotation matrix.
This is a very concise way of representing
the relationship between two vectors in different
coordinate frames, and they are related by
a rotation matrix R. Here we have the same
expression as before, and to be a bit more
precise, a bit more careful, we will add some
labels to the matrix R and we will put a leading
A and a trailing B. And, this indicates that
R is a rotation matrix that rotates a vector
from frame B to frame A. It’s important
to note and not be confused by this: the matrix
R depends on the rotation angle from frame
A to frame B. The order of these two things
is different and don’t get tripped up by
that.
Let’s have a look at the rotation matrix.
A matrix like this is referred to as an orthogonal
matrix or sometimes an orthonormal matrix.
Each column in this matrix is a unit vector
and you can show that for yourself pretty
easily. Each column in the matrix is orthogonal
to the other columns. In this case, there
are only two columns and you can show, again
very easily, that a vector formed by the first
column is orthogonal to the vector formed
by the second column. The dot product of the
two columns will be equal to zero. A really
useful property of an orthogonal matrix is
that its inverse is the same as its transpose.
Computing the inverse of a matrix is rather
complex, whereas computing its transpose is
really very simple. So, it’s great that
we have a matrix whose inverse can be computed
very simply by transposing the elements of
the matrix.
Another property of the rotation matrix is
that its determinant is always equal to 1.
And this means that, if I multiply any vector
by this matrix, the length of the vector is
unchanged. That’s an important property
of a rotation matrix. When I rotate a vector
from one coordinate frame to another, its
length is not changed. A mathematician would
say that a rotation matrix like this belongs
to the special orthogonal group of dimension
two. And, symbolically, we’d write that
as R is an element of - belongs to - the set
SO(2), special orthogonal group of dimension
2. Here’s the expression from above. And,
if I take the rotation matrix across the other
side of the equal sign, I can write this.
This indicates that if I want to rotate a
vector from coordinate frame A into coordinate
frame B, I use the inverse of the rotation
matrix from coordinate frame A to coordinate
frame B. And, remember, that the inverse of
a rotation matrix is simply its transpose.
The labels A and B in this first expression
are completely general and it’s completely
proper for me to swap the A and the B and
now I can write this. These two equations
are equivalent. So, now I can write this and
this is really important. What it says is
the rotation matrix from coordinate frame
B to coordinate frame A is the inverse of
A to coordinate frame B. Let’s have a look
at some concrete examples of this in MATLAB.
First of all, I’m going to create a two-dimensional
rotation matrix using the Toolbox command
rot2 for rotation matrix in two dimensions.
And, I’m going to ask for a rotation angle
of 0 radians. And, here is the 2 x 2 rotation
matrix and it is the identity matrix. It’s
got 1s on the diagonal and 0s on the off diagonal.
I can ask for a rotation that corresponds
to an angle say of nought point 2 radians
and this is that rotation matrix. I can also
specify the angle in degrees. So, for instance,
I could ask for the angle R of 30 degrees
and this is the corresponding rotation matrix.
What I’m going to do is to put that result
in to the workspace variable R and here is
the rotation matrix again for a rotation of
positive 30 degrees. Now, we talked a moment
ago about this rotation matrix having a number
of properties, and one of the properties was
that the columns are orthogonal. So, I’m
going to create a variable which represents
the first column of a matrix, another variable
which corresponds to the second column of
the matrix. And, if I look at the dot product
of those two vectors, we can see that it is
equal to 0. Another property that we mentioned
is that the determinant of the matrix is equal
to positive 1 and we can quite easily verify
that. Another property we talked about is
that the inverse of the matrix is the same
as its transpose. So, the inverse of the matrix
is computed using the MATLAB built in function
inv, and the transpose is computed using the
quote operator just like that and we can see
quite clearly that the inverse is equal to
the transpose.
Finally, we can visualize this rotation matrix
as a rotated coordinate frame. To do that,
I use the Toolbox function, trplot2. It’s
a short for transform plot in two dimensions.
I pass in the rotation matrix that I’m interested
in and there is a representation of the coordinate
frame. Now, it looks a little bit odd because
I need to set the axis scaling to equal and
here we see a right angled coordinate frame
shown here in blue and we can see that it
is rotated with respect to the world coordinate
frame.